The main trade here, as you can imagine, they were the name of that fish cart, the main trade was fish.
There was an awful lot of fish landed here. Fish was kippered, fish was preserved in salt,
sent all over the country. They even had a trade as far as Russia, I believe, who did salt fish.
So it was a busy little port. And there was a lot of smuggling went on. And the smuggling was
quite mundane in the sense that they were smuggling salt, because you had to pay a big
tax on salt. So there was salt smuggling going on. And also lots of other things were smuggled.
You'd only have to look at the map and you've got things like Brandy Cove,
Gin Cove. You can imagine what was being put into those coves. Booze from Europe, wine.
But the official business was really just fish. But anybody traveling down this coastline had to
have somewhere to hide if the weather got bad. Imagine a ship that doesn't have an engine.
It's reliant on the weather. So you needed somewhere you could duck into and get out of
the weather if the weather turned bad. And traditionally, you have the headland of St. David's
and you've got the Octopatorum. The Romans knew about St. David's. The old map mentioned by
Pliny, Ptolemy's map, the Marksdown Fish Guard and the headland of St. David's. St. David's headland
was called Octopatorum, the eight perils. And so that the eight perils was eight reefs, big reefs,
reefs outside of St. David's. So to get around that headland was a big job. And particularly
in a sailing boat, because you don't know on which way the wind was blowing, which way the tide was
going. The easiest way of describing it is to say you had to come up on the tide. You had to wait
until the tide was right and the weather was right before you get around that headland.
And the first place you came to where you could hide out of bad weather if the weather turned
nasty, which it does, as you know, quite well in Wales, was Fish Guard. And Fish Guard Harbor was
a good place to come in. Even if you weren't trading in fish, say you were trading in timber
or you were trading in any other product, you'd come into the harbor to hide from the weather and
you'd pay harbor duty. You'd pay harbor duty to come in to hide in the harbor for a couple of days
and then pass on out. And at the same time, you'd be buying local products.
It was a good place to be. It made money.